BRAIN- Question- positionwise and functionwise 
   Structure-
   Central organ of nervous system
   Including spinal cord with brain is central nervous system
   Parts - Cerebrum  Brainstem and Cerebellum
   Brain is connected to spinal cord
   Human like brain - Chimpanzee, Macaque(Bandar), Mouse
   Brain contains 65% fat
   
   Parts-
   1) Forebrain (Cerebrum, Thalamus, LimbicSystem(Hypothalamus))
   2) Midbrain (Smallest part of brain)
   3) Hindbrain (Cerebellum, Pons, Medulla)
   
   Cerebrum is the largest part in brain
   Functions - Interpret touch, Vision and hearing, Speech, Reasoning(Intelligence)(important), Learning and movement control
   
   Thalamus carries sensory information from the body to Cerebrum and limbic system
   It alerts brain Ex- garam tawa touch
   
   Limbic System is between Cerebrum and thalamus
   Functions - Hunger, Thirst, Fear, Anger, Sexual responses, control emotions
   Hypothalamus(important) release hormones and regulating body temperature
   Ex- khushi se aansu wala hormone

   Midbrain functions - control reflex(automatic) moments and hearing reflex
   Ex- byk speed slow legs down, awaz aai mundi ghoomi

   Cerebellum balance of body and voluntary moments(dance)
   Pons controls sleep, breathing pattern
   Medulla controls automatic action like breathing, blood circulation(important), hearth rate, swallowing 
   
   

DIGESTIVE SYSTEM-
   Five stages of digestive system-
   1. Ingestion - Intake of food
   2. Digestion
   3. Absorption - In Small Intestine(villies), absorbs nutritions. 
   4. Essimilation - In Large Intestine. Converts nutritions to energy.
   5. Excretion/Egestion

   Process- 
   Mouth(Buccal Cavity) -> Salivary gland -> Stomach(3-4 hrs) -> Liver -> Small intestine -> Large intestine -> rectum -> anus
   Total length 9 metre of process (digestive gut). 1.5+ 6+ 1.5
   Parasteltic movement in Esophagus 
   Spinter holds food at different places. First spinter between Stomach and liver for 3-4 hours until food digest in stomach. Second spinter between liver and small intestine, in bile juice. Third spinter between and small and large intestine. Last spinter in anus
   Water digest in 1 min

   Digestion Process-
   Food goes from mouth to Salivary gland 
   Salivary gland releases 3 enzymes - Ptylin, Maltose, Amylase. Digests CO2 and starch
   Now food in stomach. Stomach has 3 enzymes - HCl, Pepsin and Renin. HCl kills bacteria, pepsin digest protein and renin digest fat
   Now food in liver, bile juice from gall bladder and liver, yellowish green colour, Digests fat. Parallelly, Pancreas Juice from Pancreas - 3 enzymes - Tripsin digest protein, Amylase digest carbs and Lyphase digest fat
   Bile Duct is a pouch in which bile juice is there, pancreas juice also comes in this and food also comes in this
   Now food goes to Small intestine then to large intestine
   *Protein digests too late
   *Final digestion completes in Bile Duct

   *Teeth - 8+8+8+8 in adults 2123 - Inscissor Canine Premolar Molar. 5+5+5+5 teeth in children 2102
   *Wisdom Tooth - Last Molar (Akkal Daad) - Connected to brain
   *Pancreas(is on back side of liver) release 2 hormones - Insulin(converts sugar to glucose) and Glucagon(Stores as glucose)
   *Less insulin hence Diabetes
   *Food Pipe - Esophagus
   *Stomach - JShepherd
   *Liver - Biggest organ in digestive system
   *Gall bladder removes chiknai 
   *Appendix - for digesting chlorophyll - Vestigial Organ . Cow have biggest organ Appendix



HEART AND RESPIRATORY SYSTEM-
   Impure Blood comes from Body through Superior and Inferior Vanacava to Right Atrium
   Then 2/3rd of blood goes to Right Ventrical through TriCuspid valve.
   Then 2/3rd of blood goes from Right Ventrical through Pulmonary Artery to Lungs [Alvelli(Bronchi)](Alvelli - like channi to filter)
   Then Pure Blood from lungs through Pulmonary Vein goes to Left Atrium
   Then 2/3rd of blood from Left Atrium to Left Ventricle through BiCuspid Valve
   Then 2/3rd blood from Left Ventrical through Aorta(3 pipes to increase pressure) to Body and Heart

   Brain uses 20% of blood
   *Pericardium Membrane - Protects heart
   Septum - Divides heart into two parts
   Nasal Cvity - in nose
   Pharnyx - Moves food to food pipe from mouth
   Front pipe - wind pipe, Back pipe - Food Pipe
   Epiglottis - Maintains food to go to food pipe instead of wind pipe
   *Larnyx - Gale ki gaanth - Voice Box - Adam's Apple
   Trachea - holds food and wind pipe in a single pipe
   *Left lung - 2 lob, Right lung - 3 lob



BLOOD-
   Fluid connective tissue
   Contains RBC, WBC and platelets
   In blood - 55% plasma(yellow coloured seen in Drip), 1% WBC and platelets, 44% RBC
   Plasma is liquid, Corpusceles/MovingCells are solid
   Corpusceles - RBC(Erythrocyte), WBC(Leukocyte) and Platelets(Thrombocyte)

   Plasma - 90% water, 8% protein and other as Na and Cl electrolytes
   RBC - Nucleus Absent(hence do not divide) - life is 120 days. 
         RBC gives colour to blood, Red due to Iron + Haemoglobin. 
         RBC dies in Spleen(Graveyard of RBC)
         Octopus has Copper hence blood is blue, Cockroach dont have Haemoglobin hence colour is yellow/White
         Camel and lamma has nucleus in RBC.
         12-16gm per 100ml must be haemoglobin in human body
   WBC - Created in Bone Marrow
         Works on Immunity, life is 3-4 days
         Contains nucleus
         Five cells -   Neurophyll(54-62%) - protects from bacterial infection
                        Eosinophyll(1-3%) - protects from allergic condition and parasite
                        Basophyll(<1%) - Release Heparin and Histamine
                        Monocyte(3-9%) - Helps to recover from malaria, typhoid diseases. Self recovery
                        Lymphocyte(25-33%) - Produce antibody
   Platelets - Tiny Blood cells to clot blood with Fibrin and Thrombin. Ex - Burada and Fevicol used to fix broken bat

   BLOOD GROUP(Imp)-
   Antigen and Antibodies
   Antigen moves Antibody to clotting place
   A, B, AB and O - Discovered by Karl Landsteiner in 1940
   Blood group is identified from sugar layer present on RBC and also by protein layer on RBC. Protein layer holds sugar/glucose
   Negative group comes from Rh factor. If Protein layer < 50%.
   Rehus Macaca - bandar experiment. No layer of sugar present on RBC. Hence said negative Rh.
   AB- (AB Negative) is the rarest blood group. Problems in bearing baby due to no sugar layer and weakness

   A  - Antigen A,   Antibody B     Recieve from A,O.                         Donate to A,AB
   B  - Antigen B,   Antibody A     Recieve from B,O                          Donate to B,AB
   AB - Antigen AB,  Antibody O     Recieve from O, AB Universal Acceptor     Donate to AB
   O  - Antigen O,   Antibdy AB     Recieve from O                            Universal Donor

   *5-6L of blood in a human body, 5040ml
   *Blood is created in bone marrow in adults. In 2-3 years baby, it is created in Liver.
   *Plasma has protein - Fibrin(Blood Clotting), Thrombin(Blood clotting) and Heparin(Anti clotting inside body)
   *Diseases related to WBC,RBC - Anaemia - Less RBC
                                  Polycythemia - High RBC (Blood clots, Thick blood), results in cardiac arrest
                                  Lenkopenia - Less WBC (Immunity decrease)
                                  Leukaemia - High WBC (Blood Cancer) Ex- Rishi Kapoor
   Blood cells + Plasma = Blood
   Blood - Fibrin = Serum 



PLANT STRUCTURE-
   Divided into Shoot and Root System
   Food from top to bottom, Water from bottom to top
   Plant tissues(combination of cells) types -  Meristematic Tissues -  changes with time, temporary. 
                                                                        Cells divide continuously. Cells undifferentiated from each other 
                                                                        Cells are small
                                                                        Intercellular space absent
                                                                        Vacuolous absent(separate from one tissue with another)
                                                                        Cell walls thin
                                                                        Inorganic inclusions are absent. they die in contact of chemicals
                                                Permanent Tissues -     Do not divide, cells differentiated from each other
                                                                        Cell wall thin or thick
  
   Meristematic Tissues(small trees) -    Apical Meristem - topmost part where plant grows,   baby
                                          Lateral Meristem - middle part which is young,      young
                                          Intercalary Meristem - old and rigid, bottom,       old
   Permanent Tissues(Big trees)  -        Simple - Parenchyma(Top part)
                                                   Collenchyma(middle part)
                                                   Sclerenchyma(bottom part) - Fibres and Selereids
                                          Complex - Phloem(Food/glucose made on leaf from top to bottom) and Xylem(Water from bottom to top)

   Functioning-
   Root, Stem, Flower, Leaves, Seeds
   Tiller - tehni for support like in lotus
   Blade - leaf ki banavat to surive
   Stolen - When a tree grows from root of another tree

   Types of roots - Tap Root(Edible roots like carrot grown inside ground) and Fibrous Root(Carrot ke reshe on carrot)
   Onion and Potato are stem beacause it has root inside and has leaves on it
   

   Leaves - Thin with large surface area, contains chlorophyll in chloroplasts
            Leaves are Plant's food Factory, main site of photosynthesis by chlorophyll
   Stems -  Contains Xylum and Phloem, transports food, water and minerals
            Provides support to leaf and fruits and roots
   Roots -  Grabs soil, absorbtion of water and minerals.
            Protects and lubricates growing root













SSC LIVE - CURRENT AFFAIRS VARUN AWASTHI



