SOLAR SYSTEM-
    Big Bang Theory -   An object SuperNova, temperature increased and exploded and gravitational pull formed and rotates
                        These gravitational pull are called galaxies, total 10^11 galaxies
                        Our Galaxy Milky way/ AakashGanga
                        Planets dont go out of solar system due to gravitational pull and people are bounded by gravitational bound
                        Solar system was formed 4.6 Billion years ago
                        Most mass is in Sun(Star), then in Jupiter(Planet)
                        Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars are composed of metals and rocks, Terestorial planets. Therefore magnetic altitude of Earth
                        Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune - Gas Grint. Uranus, Neptune - Ice Grint

    Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars - Inner Solar System
    Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune - Outer Solar System

    SUN-
    Sun is the Father of Solar System.
    99.86% space of galaxy is Sun. Hydrogen and Helium is present hence hot, release electromagnetic radiation
    It is 13 Lakh time greater than earth
    Temperature at corona 6000 degree celcius, center 20L degree celcius
    Sun also rotates on its axis.

    GALAXY-
    Lyman Alpha Blobs   - Heavy cluter bodies found in universe
    *Andromeda Galaxy   - Messier 31 or M31. Nearest galaxy to our milky way
    Milky way Galaxy    - Galaxy in which our solar system is. 400 Billion stars
    Sirius              - Dog star (Most Shining star, Dhruv tara), it is moving closer to the solar system
    Proxima Century     - Closest star to Sun
    Super Nova          - Primitive star, which exploded and universe created
    Neutron Star        - Small size, radius 30km and high density. Converts to black hole. Tootta hua tara, Khatam ho gaya.
    Asteroids           - Small frgments of rock and dust that keep revolving around the sun between the orbits of Mars and Jupitor
    Pulsar              - May look like stars but are not stars. Highly magnetic rotating neutron star (timtimaate taare). Marta hua taara

    INNER SOLAR SYSTEM-
    Mercury   - 88 days revolution period, fastest motion. No life, no satellites/moon. 
                Smallest planet in solar system
    **Venus   - 225 days revolution period. 
                Brightest planet of solar system.   
                97% CO2. Baloon of Gases.
                Temperature 475 degree, hottest planet. This is due to trapping by Clouds of Sulphuric acid. 
                Evening and Morning star because we can see it in night since light trapped in clouds.
    Earth     - Distance from sun - 14.96Cr Kms
                Surface is 71% water
                365 days 1/4th of a day revolution. 29.8km/sec
                Polar radius - 12714 Kms. Equitorial Radius - 12756 Kms
                Rotation Period - 23 hrs 56 min 4 sec
                Highest point - Mt Everest - 8848 meter
                Deepest point - Mariana Trench - Pacific ocean - 10994 meter
                8 min 18 sec - light reaches from sun to earth - 500 seconds
                Inner earth - Fe > O > Si > Mg > Ni. Earth Crust - O > Si > Al > Fe > Ni
    Mars      - Red Planet - Soil imparts of red soil (Iron Oxide)
                Big deserts in surface
                CO2, NO2 and their inert Gases
                Second Smallest planet in Solar system
                Distance from earth - 50679452 Kms - 5Cr Kms
                Waether - cold 
                Sunrise Sunset - 5:30 AM PM
                Mars to Sun - 142 Million miles.
                Earth to Sun - 93 million miles

    OUTER SOLAR SYSTEM-
    Jupiter   - Biggest planet of solar system
                Methane, Ammonia and Hydrogen in atmosphere
                *11 times heavy than earth
                63 natural moons, 79 total
                -123 degree temperature. It has red giant support
                *Ganymede biggest satellite of Jupiter and Solar system
    Saturn    - 7 rings made of asteroids, Second largest planet
                Largest satellite is Titan
                Known as Galaxy Like Planet
                Least density in entire solar system
                -178 degree temperature
                29.5 years revolution
                Last planet that we can see by naked eyes
                82 satellites. Max satellites
    Uranus    - Green Planet due to Sulphur
                5 rings, Alpha Beta Gamma Theta and Epsilon. Discovered by William Herschel in 1781
                Made up of gases, solid core of metal and rock
                2.8 Billion kms from sun, -216 degree
                Third Largest Planet
                Hydrogen Helium Like Jupiter, contains more ice like water, ammonia and Methane
    Neptune   - Coldest Planet
                165 years revolution, 4.95 billion kms from sun. 16 hours a day
                -216 degree
                Hydrogen, Helium, trace of Methane, water and Ammonia
    Pluto     - 1930 discovered by Claude Tombaugh
                2006, Pluto is a dwarf planet by IAU since failed to pass a condition of planet
                -233 degree temperature
                Nitrogen mainly, with minor Methane and Carbon Monoxide




    Size - Jupiter > Saturn > Uranus > Neptune > Earth > Venus > Mars > Mercury
    Moon - Saturn(82) > Jupiter(79) > Uranus(27) > Neptune(14) > Mars(2) Demos and Phobos > Earth(1) > Mercury(0) and Venus(0)
    Revolution - 165 years > 84 years > 29 years > 12 years > 687 days > 365 days > 225 days > 88 days

    Questions -
    Sun is a star, Has own heat and light, Made up of gases
    Saturn and Uranus has ring around it
    Odd one - Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, Pluto  -> Pluto
    Proper observations of scientists - Mars
    Coldest Planet - Neptune
    Brightest Planet - Venus
    Sister Planet of Earth - Venus
    Diameter of moon is how much of earth - 1/4
    Weight of moon is how much of earth - 1/6
    Which planet is green planet - Uranus
    Which planet is blue planet - Earth
    Which planet has least density - Saturn
    Which is gas giant planet - Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune 


HIMALAYAN MOUNTAIN RANGES (Imp)-
    Earlier Pangea land and Tethys Sea
    Indian basalt crust and asian granite crust, basalt heavy hence sink
    Himalayan top of granite. Underground high temperature, and hence making mountain shape and volcano eruption

    Four parts of Himalayan
    1. Trans Himalayas                          -   Ladakh Range, Kailash Range, Zansker Range, Karakoram Range
    2. Great Himalayas (Himadri) Him - Snow     -   Nanga Parvat, BandarKunj in UK, Nanda Devi, Annapurna, Dhaulagiri, Macalu Range, Mt. Everest, Kanchanjunga(Sikkim)
    3. Middle Himalayas                         -   Peer Panjal(JK), Dhauladhar (HP), Mussorie(UK), Mahabharat and Naagtriba(Nepal) 
    4. Shivalik (Lesser Himalayas)              -   Named on Districts

    Pamer Knot - above India - Roof of World and Roof of India. Both sides mountain
    Hindu Kush - Left side of Pamer Knot towards Afganistan. K2(Godwin Austin) on Hindu Kush in POK
    ChunLun Mountain ranges - Right side of Pamer Knot
    Highest Mountain of India - K2 or Kanchenjanga if K2 not in option
    Whist one is most eastern range of himalaya in India - Patkai Bum
    Which one is eastern range himalayan range of himalaya -Namcha Barua
    Himalaya increasing/expanding towards east
    Himalayan Mountains also known as Young Fold Mountain ranges
    Aravali Range in Rajasthan, Oldest and no growth. Hence not Young Fold Mountain
    Only Shivalik goes ahead Sikkim
    Highest of South India - AnaiMudi Hill
    Most Southern Peak - Mahendra Giri Mountain Ranges

// TO MAINTAIN
    Mahadev Ranges, Kaimur, Maikal in MP, Garo Khasi Assam, Raj Mahal Jharkhand, Purvanchal Himalaya in East side, Ajanta in MH
    Vindhya Satpura MP, Orissa Iron Ore, MH Harishchandra, Karnataka Baba Budan for Coffee, Kadgi series, Nalkonda Andhra Pradesh
    Siachen in Karakoram Range JK
    Mahendragiri Mountain Ranges in Odissa

    Maintain and Watch in Map in a table here
// TO MAINTAIN

    In Nepal mostly -
    Dhaulagiri, Annapurna, Manaslu Himal, Ganesh Himal, Shisapangma, Gaurishankar, Cho Oyu, Everest, Lhotse, Makalu, Kanchenjunga(India mostly)

    Questions Areawise, in Which Peak, static wise like height


    PASSES-
    Jammu and Kashmir       -       Burzil pass
                                    Zoji La(pass)
    Himachal Pradesh        -       Bara Lacha La
                                    Shipki La (Hindustan Tibetian road connecting Shimla with Gartok in west Tibet)
    Uttarakhand             -       Thaga La
                                    Niti pass
                                    Lipu Lekh
    Sikkim                  -       Nathu La
                                    Jelep La (Imp trade route connecting Kalimpong near Darjelling with Lhasa in Tibet, Passes through Jelep La)

    Mt. Everest names-
    Sagarmata in Nepal (The Goddess of Sky)
    Chomlungma(Mother of world) in China(Tibet)

//TO MAINTAIN OTHERS ADD
    Waterfalls-
    Chulia Waterfalls       -       Rajasthan
    Sahastradhara           -       UK
    Rajarappa               -       Jharkhand
    Duduma                  -       Orissa
    *Gokak                  -       Karnataka
    Jog                     -       Karnataka
    Dudhsagar               -       Goa
//TO MAINTAIN



VOLCANOES-
    Types of Volcanoes - Composite(Mouth/Crater increases and spreads throung creating vents), 
                         CinderCone(Erupt instantly like pichkari), 
                         Shield(When Lava is less, comes out slowly), 
                         Lava Dome(After eruption and lava not coming out, crater is large and lava stored in crater) Volcano


    Barren Island           -       Active volcano      -   Andaman erupted in 2017
    Narcondam               -       Deactivated         -   Andaman
    Deccan Traps            -                           -   Maharashtra
    Baratang                -       Mud Volcano         -   Andaman -   Mud Volcano
    Dhinodhar               -       Extinct             -   Gujarat
    Dhosi                   -       Extinct             -   Haryana
    Tosham                  -       Extinct             -   Haryana


PLATEAUS-
    Mountain Vs Plteau - Altitude, Rivers - Perenial(Permanent) from Mountains, No life on Mountains after a height, No Agriculture on Mountains

    Central Highland Plateau- In centre of India (in a slope on east and west, rivers flow east and west)
    1. Malwa            MP      
    2. Bundelkhand      MP-UP border
    3. Baghelkhand      Right of Malwa in MP
    4. Chota Nagpur     Right of Baghelkhand in Jharkhand

    Deccan Plateau (Sloped towards east, rivers go to east and fast flow as compared to north)
    1. Deccan Trap                      MH top
    2. Western Ghat/Sahyadri Range      below Deccan Trap in Karnataka
    3. Eastern Ghat
    4. North East Extension             above Eastern Ghats

    Chota Nagpur Plateau, waterflow is Fastest
    Deccan Plateau, More minerals


    15:00



